 Complaint 9605 Ruling by the Adjudication Panel Date of articles:                  26 August 2022 Headline of publication:   “Beware the predator politicians” (print) “Is Godongwana the latest of South Africa’s predator politicians?”  (online) Authors:                               Lizeka Tandwa and Paddy Harper Adjudication panel:           Helene Viljoen (Press Representative), Ben Winks (Public Representative), Herman Scholtz (Press Ombud) Press Ombud (Panellists Viljoen concurring, Winks partially dissenting) Particulars Background “In 2010, Steenhuisen resigned as DA KwaZulu-Natal leader over an affair with the party’s provincial spokesperson Terry Kass-Beaumont, who he later married, after divorcing his wife of 10 years. “Steenhuisen retained his position as DA MPL and caucus leader until he moved to the National Assembly in 2011.” The complaint 10.1 Firstly, that the article and headline contained material that is untrue, inaccurate, unfair, and/or misleading (Clause 1.1., 1.2. and Clause 10) 10.2 Secondly, that the Mail & Guardian did not approach any of the complainants for comment (Clause 1.8) 10.3 Lastly, there is a complaint about the infringement of the dignity and reputation of the complainants (Clause 3) “Unfair, inaccurate and misleading” “take care to report news truthfully, accurately and fairly; (and) “present news in context and in a balanced manner, without any intentional or negligent departure from the facts whether by distortion, exaggeration or misrepresentation, material omissions, or summarization.” 14.1 There is a headline warning the public at large about sexual “predators”, which – to the reasonable reader of the article – includes Mr Steenhuisen. 14.2 The print edition’s sub-headline reads: “The finance minister is not the first SA politician to get into hot water over claims of sexual misconduct.” 14.3 A very large portion of the article deals with criminal allegations raised against Godongwana before the article states: “The minister joins a long list of South African politicians who have been accused of gender-based violence. These include:…” 14.4 Some, if not most, of the other politicians mentioned in the article are or were indeed accused of predatory behaviour. One politician was sacked for sexual harassment and another was accused of a gang rape. 22.1 The artificial distinction into three categories is not tenable. A reasonable reader does not engage in an analysis of an article. 22.2 The distinction is, in any event, not tenable on the facts. The so-called third category of politicians did not “only” detail allegations of sexual misconduct and sexual escapades. It includes an elaborate recount of one politician who allegedly forced his lover to have an abortion and was accused of exploiting public resources to settle a personal score. The scandal went as far as allegations that the politician abused and manipulated the criminal justice system against the said lover. Another politician in this “section” contended for by the Mail & Guardian was accused of offering a bribe to journalists to supress a story about his alleged sexual indiscretions. These allegations go much further than a group of people being in the spotlight for sexual escapades or even sexual misconduct. Even on the version of the Mail & Guardian, Mr Steenhuisen was grouped together with those politicians and allegations detailed above. 22.3 The most poignant reason to reject the argument, is that there was no separation into three sections. It is simply not enough to have a sentence in bold font (in the print article). This aspect requires elaboration, which will follow below. 26.1 All the politicians have their names highlighted in the same font, font size, and colour. There is no distinction between the sub-heading “John Steenhuisen” and any of the other politicians. 26.2 No colour screen or side bar is utilised to make the distinction into categories as is now contended for. 26.3 The layout of the body text itself creates the impression that the article is one of a whole. If the Mail & Guardian’s argument is to be accepted of three compartments in the article, it would be strange in the extreme that the first category ends mid-way in the first leg of the article and the so-called dividing sentence, “The minister joins a list…” is not even in bold. The “divide” between the second category and third category is mid-way into the fourth column of the article. The holistic layout of the article was aimed at integrating all the elements on the page into a whole, carefully combined through modular layout and headlines and pictures that span over multiple columns. “Headlines, captions to pictures and posters shall not mislead the public and shall give a reasonable reflection of the contents of the report or picture in question.” “Absence of comment” “(The media shall) seek, if practicable, the views of the subject of critical reportage in advance of publication except when they might be prevented from reporting, or evidence destroyed, or sources intimidated…” 47.1 Reportage should still be fair and balanced. If the subject of critical reportage had a widely known response to the allegation, this ought to be repeated as well. 47.2 If anything is added to the repetition of the historical facts, it naturally does not amount to a mere repetition of information in the public domain and there would be an obligation on journalists to seek pre-publication comment. Privacy and dignity Conclusion 69.1 Apologise to the Steenhuisens for presenting facts surrounding their relationship and marriage out of context. 69.2 Apologise to its readers for the misleading headline. 69.3 The apology in the print edition should be either on the page it originally appeared or on page 2. 69.4 The apology in the online edition should be at the top of the article. It should also include a note that the article has been amended after original publication. Appeal The Complaints Procedure lays down that within seven working days of receipt of this decision, either party may apply for leave to appeal to the Chairperson of the SA Press Appeals Panel, Judge Bernard Ngoepe, fully setting out the grounds of appeal. He can be contacted at Khanyim@ombudsman.org.za. Herman Scholtz – Press Ombud Helene Viljoen – Press representative 13 February 2023 Panellist Winks partially dissenting Ben Winks – Public representative 